Initiate setup notebook for introduction module (#577)
AlexsLemonade/training-modules: scRNA-seq-advanced/setup/intro-citeseq-setup.Rmd

## Setup

```{r setup, include=FALSE}
set.seed(2022)

library(magrittr)

library(SingleCellExperiment)
library(SingleR)
library(bluster) 
```

### Download Data

To get the raw data:
```{sh eval = FALSE}
NAME=10k_PBMCs_TotalSeq_B_3p_raw_feature_bc_matrix.tar.gz
wget https://cf.10xgenomics.com/samples/cell-exp/6.0.0/10k_PBMCs_TotalSeq_B_3p/$NAME
tar -xf $NAME
# This gets unpacked into `raw_feature_bc_matrix`

# For posterity, first attempt was with MALT, but it had wildly low ADT counts
#NAME=malt_10k_protein_v3_raw_feature_bc_matrix.tar.gz
#wget https://cf.10xgenomics.com/samples/cell-exp/3.0.0/malt_10k_protein_v3/$NAME
```

## Loading Data

```{r}
pbmc_10x_dir <- "raw_feature_bc_matrix"
# for now..
mito_file <- "https://raw.githubusercontent.com/AlexsLemonade/scpca-downstream-analyses/main/reference-files/Homo_sapiens.GRCh38.104.mitogenes.txt"

pbmc_sce_raw <- DropletUtils::read10xCounts(pbmc_10x_dir)
mito_genes <- readr::read_tsv(mito_file, 
                              col_names="gene") %>%
  # only keep relevant mitochondrial genes
  dplyr::filter(gene %in% rownames(pbmc_sce_raw)) %>%
  dplyr::pull(gene)

# let's have a quick look at the raw SCE and genes:
pbmc_sce_raw

> mito_genes

Reviewer: Minor, but for teaching I would separate these chunks and put the `pbmc_sce_raw` call to print out the SCE directly after reading in the data. And then in a new chunk do the mito file.

Reviewer: And on that note, we might want to reorganize in general, so that the creation of the `mito_genes` variable actually happens before `addPerCellQC` instead of all the way up here.

Reviewer 2: Yes, I expect we will split the up much more for teaching!

```

### Split antibody tag data
Before proceeding with further filtering, we'll want to re-arrange the SCE object to handle the RNA and ADT separately.
Currently, the ADTs and genes are both part of the primary experiment, so let's move the ADT counts into an `altExp` slot.

```{r}
# We can see this in the `Type` column in the rowData() where the creators of this dataset

> #  stored experiement information

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#  stored experiment information
```

unique(rowData(pbmc_sce_raw)$Type)

# Split out the ADT into an altExp
pbmc_sce_split <- splitAltExps(pbmc_sce_raw, 
                               #"Gene Expression" or "Antibody Capture"
                               rowData(pbmc_sce_raw)$Type, 
                               # The Type which should be the main experiment
                               "Gene Expression")

# The names for the experiments were directly derived from `Type`:
mainExpName(pbmc_sce_split)
altExpNames(pbmc_sce_split)

# But here on the computer, we don't like spaces, so let's rename it to something informative
#  and space-free, like "CITEseq" or "ADT". We'll use "ADT" since typing less > typing more
altExpNames(pbmc_sce_split) <- "ADT"

# And confirm:
altExpNames(pbmc_sce_split)

# We can do this for main if we want too!
#mainExpName(pbmc_sce_split) <- "RNA"
```

### Quick ADT exploration

Let's look at our ADTs:

```{r}
# Here's how we can see the altExp itself - it's its own SCE object
altExp(pbmc_sce_split)

# What are the tags?
rownames(altExp(pbmc_sce_split))
```

These are all human surface proteins except `IgG1`, which is a mouse isotype that was used as a control. 

> We'd, if there's no contamination, that there are 0 counts for this protein since the data is human:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If there's no contamination, there should be 0 counts for this protein since the data is human:
```

counts(altExp(pbmc_sce_split))

# Use rowSums to see totals:
# Wow, almost no IgG1! Hurray. 
rowSums(counts(altExp(pbmc_sce_split)))
```

> At this point we could consider removing cells with IgG1 > 0 and remove the antibody entirely.

### Filter RNA

#### First, with `DropletUtils`

```{r}
# Filter RNA
droplet_df <- DropletUtils::emptyDropsCellRanger(
  counts(pbmc_sce_split), 
  BPPARAM = BiocParallel::MulticoreParam(4)
) 

# Filter down to low FDR cells and check out dimensions
# Values here are mostly NA.
# NOTE: this filtering does propagate to altExp!! :) 
cells_to_retain <- which(droplet_df$FDR <= 0.01)
filtered_sce <- pbmc_sce_split[, cells_to_retain]
dim(pbmc_sce_split)  # before filtering
dim(filtered_sce)  # after filtering
```

#### Now, with `miQC`

We'll need some mitochondria stats for `miQC`:

```{r}
filtered_sce <- scater::addPerCellQC(
  filtered_sce, 
  subsets = list(mito = mito_genes))

# See that `sum` is RNA only and `total` is both RNA and ADT?
head(filtered_sce$sum)
head(filtered_sce$total)

all(filtered_sce$total >= filtered_sce$sum) # total is never going to be LOWER than sum
```

```{r}
miqc_model <- miQC::mixtureModel(filtered_sce) 

> filtered_sce <- miQC::filterCells(filtered_sce,

Reviewer: I think we might to explore miQC a bit and look at some of the outputs. I think this is another PR, but just wanted to comment that I don't want to leave miQC at this simplicity and I think we should explore it a bit more.

Reviewer 2: Agreed!

                                  model = miqc_model)

dim(filtered_sce)
```

### Filter ADT

We're not going to talk about this in depth, since it's still an active area of study! 
But, be aware that RNA and ADTs are treated differently. 
As always we recommend [Orchestrating](ttp://bioconductor.org/books/3.16/OSCA.advanced/integrating-with-protein-abundance.html).

> We will focus on only removing 0 count cells.

Reviewer: Is `cleanTagCounts` only removing 0 count cells? I think it's a bit more complex than that since they compute an ambient factor for each cell and remove based on that. I know we haven't added the full teaching explanation yet, but I want to make sure that we don't include false information. Maybe just for now we should mention that it uses an ambient factor to filter cells?

- `CD56`
  - "CD56 expression is also found in, among others, the hematopoietic system. Here, the expression of CD56 is mostly associated with, but not limited to, **natural killer cells**. CD56 has been detected on other lymphoid cells, including **gamma delta Τ cells and activated CD8+ T cells**, as well as on **dendritic cells**." [source](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Neural_cell_adhesion_molecule)

Let's color cells by their most prevalent ADT:

```{r does anybody have a UMAP}
scater::plotReducedDim(norm_sce, "UMAP", colour_by = "max_adt", 
                       point_alpha = 0.6, point_size = 0.25)
```

## Cell type annotation from RNA

We can introduce annotation with `SingleR`, and it might be a good idea to show how the results are highly influenced by the reference. 
For now, I'm just using the `HumanPrimaryCellAtlasData` reference as a starting place.
Note that all references here involve some caching, and we can expect some interactive prompting to go by for setting up these caches that we'll have to walk everyone through.

```{r}
ref_data <- celldex::HumanPrimaryCellAtlasData(ensembl = TRUE) # pick one for now to start

> preds <- SingleR::SingleR(

Reviewer: ```suggestion
singleR_predictions <- SingleR::SingleR(
```
super minor, but can we name this something slightly more informative? I'm open to other names too like `celltype_predictions`

  test = norm_sce, 
  ref = ref_data,
  labels = ref_data$label.main, # "coarse-grained" labels
  # faster!
  BPPARAM = BiocParallel::MulticoreParam(4)
)
preds

# We can place these into the sce
norm_sce$celltype_predictions <- preds$pruned.labels

# **heavily** biased towards monocytes and T-cells
celltype_counts <- preds %>%
  as.data.frame() %>%
  dplyr::count(pruned.labels) %>%
  dplyr::arrange(desc(n))

celltype_counts

```

Visualize the predictions in a couple ways:
```{r}
SingleR::plotScoreHeatmap(preds)
```

```{r UMAP for the people}
# Not too shabby!
scater::plotReducedDim(norm_sce, "UMAP", colour_by = "celltype_predictions", 
                       point_alpha = 0.4, point_size = 0.25)
```

> It might be helpful to hone in on the most prevalent cell types only for ease of visualization, but this is a bit more advanced to dive into.

Reviewer: I actually think it might be worth showing both plots with all the types and then the plot with just the top cell types. Also offers an opportunity for talking about making good visualizations.
